---
layout: default
title: BlackJack
type: Homework
number: 05
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2023-09-28
due_date: <s>2023-10-09</s> 2023-10-30 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

_Due: {{page.due_date}}_

In this homework you will be implementing BlackJack based on the description below.

This homework <s>project</s> is a paired project, meaning that you can work on this with a partner. 


> Requirements:
> 
> - Use `printf`. You are not allowed to use any other
> method for printing output 
> - Every method should be properly documented using the java doc notation.
> - You are **NOT ALLOWED** to use loops. Using a loop will result in a `0`. Use recursion instead 
> - Every java file should have a header. However, ***DO NOT PUT YOUR NAME IN YOUR HEADERS***. On gradescope we grade your assignments anonymously so including your name in your Java file will defeat that purpose. However, please include your name in your README.txt
> Note, in the examples, `*` indicates user input.

## BlackJack

Write a program called `BlackJack.java` that will allow a user to play a simplified version of BlackJack.
The rules of BlackJack are as follows:

- Each card has a value ranging from 1 to 11 (inclusive).
- The player starts with two cards. 
- The house starts with two cards. The player is shown just one of the houses's cards. 
- Until the value of the player's hand (i.e. the sum of the value of their cards) is greater than or equal
to 21, the player has two options: "Hit" or "Stand".
- If the player chooses "Hit", they are given another card.
- If the value of the player's hand is ever greater than 21, the player automatically looses.
- Once the player chooses "Stand", their turn ends
- If the value of the dealer's hand is less than 15, then give them another card chosen at random.
- If the value of the dealer's hand is greater than or equal to the player's hand, the dealer wins. Otherwise the player wins (assuming they did not go over 21). 

##### Example 1 
```
$ javac BlackJack.java; java BlackJack
One of the dealer's cards is 5
Your hand's value is 12. What would you like to do:
*HIT*
Your hand's new value is 22. 
You lost - goodbye!
```

##### Example 2 
```
$ javac BlackJack.java; java BlackJack
One of the dealer's cards is 10
Your hand's value is 13. What would you like to do:
*HIT*
Your hand's new value is 20. What would you like to do:
*STAY*
The dealer's hand is 19.
You won - congrats! 
```

##### Example 3
```
$ javac BlackJack.java; java BlackJack
One of the dealer's cards is 11
Your hand's value is 22. 
You lost - goodbye!
```

##### Example 4
```
$ javac BlackJack.java; java BlackJack
One of the dealer's cards is 9
Your hand's value is 5. What would you like to do:
*HiT*
Your hand's new value is 7. What would you like to do:
*hiT*
Your hand's new value is 11. What would you like to do:
*hit*
Your hand's new value is 18. What would you like to do:
*stAy*
The dealer's hand is 12.
The dealer's hand is 15.
The dealer's hand is 21.
You lost - goodbye!
```

### 2. Requirements

#### Case-insensitive

Your program must be case-insensitive. That means that if a user inputs "Hit", or "hit", or "HIT", then 
you give them another card (the same goes for "Stay").

Lok at Example 4 to see how the program must accept "stAy" or "hiT" or "HiT" as valid options.

#### Robust to bad user input
If a user inputs something besides for Stay or Hit, then re-prompt the user for a valid answer.
The example below demonstrates how your program should work:

```
$ javac BlackJack.java; java BlackJack
One of the dealer's cards is 5
Your hand's value is 12. What would you like to do:
*SHtay*
SHtay is invalid.
Your hand's value is 12. What would you like to do:
*hit*
Your hand's new value is 22. 
You lost - goodbye!
```



### 3. Hints

- `Math.random()` generates a random value between 0 and 1. Use this
to create the value of a random card. The value of a card ranges from 1 to 11 (inclusive).

## README.txt

In a text file called `README.txt` answer the following questions:

1. How much time did you spend on the homework
2. What did you learn from this homework
3. optional: What did you struggle with during this homework
4. optional: any other feedback you would like to share

**Dont forget:** make sure to fill in the header in all of your java files.

## Submitting

Submit the following files to the assignment called `BlackJackProject` on Gradescope:

1. `BlackJack.java`
4. `README.txt`

Make sure to name these files exactly what we specify here. Otherwise,
our autograders might not work and we might have to take points off.
