---
layout: default
title: Bryn Mawr Vet in need of a Java Programmer
type: Homework
number: 08
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2024-04-11
due_date: 2024-04-18 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

The goals of this assignment are:

- Practice designing classes
- Uses objects
- Working across multiple Java files
- Implementing an interface


> Requirements:
> 
> - Every java file should have a header. However, ***DO NOT PUT YOUR NAME IN YOUR HEADERS***. On gradescope we grade your assignments anonymously so including your name in your Java file will defeat that purpose. However, please include your name in your README.txt
> - Every method should contain a javdoc that briefly describes the method, lists the params, and the return type/value. Use the notation that we used in lectures.
> - All of your instance variables should be `private`. If a subclass will need access to the instance variables, then the instance variables can be `protected`.


> **WARNING:** In this assignment you are **NOT ALLOWED** to import any packages. For example, you cannot use the builtin `Arrays` java class to print out an array. Doing so will result in earning **ZERO POINTS** for a method that uses it.

> **IF YOUR CODE DOES NOT COMPILE, YOUR SUBMISSION WILL BE DEDUCTED ATLEAST 50%**. 

## 1. Overview

Once upon a time, there was a small veterinary clinic that needed help managing their records. They had tried using paper records, but they found it was too difficult to keep track of everything. They decided to hire a Java programmer to create a program that would help them manage their records more efficiently.

As part of your Intro to CS in Java course, your professor has assigned you to develop this program for the vet clinic. You'll be using your Java skills to create a program that can keep track of all the animals, their owners, and some more information.

The vet clinic has provided you with some basic requirements for the program. They want to be able to add new animals, remove animals, determine the average cost of each visit for an animal. Some of the requirements for what a Vet must do are detailed in the Java interface called `Database.java`.


Your task is to create a solution that meets these requirements. You'll be using object-oriented programming principles to create classes for `Pets`, and some specific type of pets (detailed in `HW08Driver.java`).

As you work on this assignment , you'll have the opportunity to practice important object-oriented programming concepts, such as inheritance, polymorphism, and encapsulation. 

At the end of the project, you'll present your program to the vet clinic (by uploading your solution to Gradescope ofcourse), and they'll be able to use it to manage their records more efficiently. You'll have made a real-world impact with your programming skills, and you'll have gained valuable experience that will help you in your future programming projects.

The clinic has given you a driver program called `HW08Driver.java` that should work after you implement the required classes.

The text file `driverResults.txt` shows what the results of running `java HW08Driver` should be.

You can find the three files by appending them to 
this url: `{{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/hws/hw09/`.

> **WARNING:** You are **NOT** allowed to edit `HW08Driver.java` or `Database.java` 

## 2. Details

First, open `HW08Driver.java` and take a look. You'll notice it expects a number of pet classes: `Pet.java`, `Cat.java`, `Dog.java`. You'll need to implement eaach of these.
It also requires a `Vet.java` which implements the `Database` interface.  

Look closely at `HW08Driver.java` to see which methods you'll need to include in each of these classes. 

For example, the constructors of `Pet` and `Cat` take a name, owner, and a weight.  The `Dog` constructor takes these variables as well as a String for size. 

A `Pet` also has a `visit` method which takes a number of shots and returns a cost.

The constructor for `Vet` takes a max number of clients and a name of the clinic. 

For the expected behavior of methods (`display` for example) look at the expected output in `driverResults.txt`

### 2.1 Costs for visits

Each time an animal visits the clinic, the owner has to pay a fee. The fee depends on the following criteria:

The base cost for a visit is \$85.00, and \$30 is added for every shot.

Any time a dog visits the clinic, 
the dog's nails are trimmed (costing \$25). Additionally, since more help is needed for giving shots to different sized dogs (see the driver for the options for dog sizes), the clinic adds a surcharge of \$5.50 per shot for medium dogs and \$12.75 per shot for large dogs.

Any time a cat visits the clinic, the cat gets a teeth cleaning. Since there is a short supply of FDA-approved cat toothpase, a cat's teeth cleaning is \$40.

Any time an outside cat visits the clinic, it must get an additional shot.  

### Database interface

You will notice that the methods in the `Database` interface a very generic in that they take in `Object`s as parameters.

For some of the methods, you will have to check the type of object that is being passed in. You can use `instanceof` 

```
String one = "one";
boolean isString = one instanceof String;
```

The boolean variable named `isString` will then take on the value `true`.

**Type Casting**
Recall from earlier in the semester that type casting allows us to converف the type of a value stored in a variable.
From page 46 of the text, 
*the syntax for type casting is to put the name of the type in parentheses and
use it as an operator:*

```
double pi = 3.14159;
int x = (int) pi;
```
Here, the value in `x` will be `3`.

We can use type casting to convert the types of objects as well. This code shows how to use type casting to convert a simple object to a `CustomType` object.

```
Object a = new Object()
CustomeType newVar = (CustomType) a
```


## README.txt

In a text file called `README.txt` answer the following questions:

1. How much time did you spend on the homework
2. What did you learn from this homework
3. optional: What did you struggle with during this homework
4. optional: any other feedback you would like to share

**Dont forget:** make sure to fill in the header in all of your java files.

## Submitting

Submit the following files to Gradescope:
1. `Vet.java`
2. `Pet.java`
3. `Cat.java`
4. `Dog.java`
5. `README.txt`
Do not upload `HW08Driver.java` or `Database.java`.
