---
layout: default
title: SuperArrays
type: Homework
number: 09
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2023-12-05
due_date: 2023-12-14 17:00:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


</div>
{% endif %}




{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}}
=============================================================

The goals of this assignment are:

- Practice designing classes
- Implementing an interface
- Comparing different approaches to sovle a problem

> **WARNING:** In this assignment you are **NOT ALLOWED** to import any packages. For example, you cannot use the builtin `Arrays` java class to print out an array. Doing so will result in earning **ZERO POINTS** for a method that uses it.

> **IF YOUR CODE DOES NOT COMPILE, YOU WILL EARN 0 POINTS FROM THE AUTOGRADER**.


## 1. Overview

In this last assignment, you will implement two classes: `SuperDuperArray` and `SuperDuperSortedArray`. These classes will implement the interface called `SuperArray`. We will provide you the interface called `SuperArray` that we provide.

You can find the interface [here]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/hws/hw10/SuperArray.java).

Both classes will keep track of an array of `String`s.

For both of these classes, the `toString()` method should return one line that contains all the Strings. Each item should be seperated by a space. 
For `remove`, it should return a boolean indicating if the input element exists in the array or not. 

## 2. SuperDuperArray

`SuperDuperArray` will be a wrapper around a `String[]`.  Create a `String[]` as a private instance variable of your class. 
Implement a value constructor which takes one argument: `int capacity`. This will be the size of your array. Initialize your array instance variable in the constructor accordingly.  

In addition to implementing all methods in the interface, `SuperDuperArray`, the class must include the following:

1. a method called `String[]  sort(int order)` that takes in an integer to determine whether to sort in `ascending` or `descending` order. `1` means `ascending` and `2` means `descending`. The `sort` method must return a new sorted array. You are free to use Bubble or Selection Sort. You can use the built-in String methods for determining whether one String is greater than another.
2. The class must retain the order in which the elements were added.


## 2. SuperDuperSortedArray

Next, implement a class `SuperDuperSortedArray` which also implements the interface `SuperArray`. In this class, the array of elements must always be sorted. Each time an element is added, make sure the list stays sorted. One approach would be to add the element and then sort the elements. However, this approach would be `O(n^2)`. For full points, come up with a faster approach.

Think about how you can implement `remove` and `contains` differently to be more efficient than in `SuperDuperArray`. For full points, `add` and `remove` should have a worst case complexity of `O(n)` and `contains` should have a worst case complexity of `O(logn)`.

This class should also have a value constructor which takes a capacity.

## README.txt

In a text file called `README.txt` answer the following questions:

1. Imagine you are building a program to keep records for a `Vet`. Which class would you rather use `SuperDuperSortedArray` or `SuperDuperSorted`? Make sure to justify your answer - there is no wrong answer here.
2. Next, make an argument for why it would be a good idea to use the other class that you didnt advocate for before.
3. List the Big O notation of the following methods for both `SuperDuperArray` and `SuperDuperSortedArray`: `size`, `isEmpty`, `add`, `remove`, `contains`, `toString`. For `SuperDuperArray`, list the Big O notation of `sort`.
4. How much time did you spend on the homework
5. What did you learn from this homework
6. optional: What did you struggle with during this homework
7. optional: any other feedback you would like to share

**Dont forget:** make sure to fill in the header in all of your java files.

## Submitting

Submit the following files to the assignment called `HW09` on Gradescope:

1. `SuperDuperArray.java`
1. `SuperDuperSortedArray.java `
4. `README.txt`

Make sure to name these files exactly what we specify here and name the methods exactly what we specify too. Otherwise,
our autograders might not work and we might have to take points off.
